I'm just gonna give you a few just an
outline of the evening just to give you
a sense of of the program I love it when
people read from their own books so I've
asked Ezra to read from her own book and
I also particularly like it when they
don't tell you what parts they're going
to read from the book because it's a
surprise and generates new ideas and new
questions I also obviously have been
interviewed myself several times but
also don't I don't share questions
beforehand and often don't even make
questions beforehand
I'd like to have a real conversation so
so what we do is I'll have us reread
I've asked to read two passages from the
book I don't know what the passages are
and then start from there start the
conversation from there we will then
talk obviously the book has raised a lot
of questions and for me but also a lot
of questions for the cancer community
and for the world at large and I wanted
to be I want to have a provocative
conversation around those topics then we
will after about I would say about an
hour or so we will break for questions
and at the end of the questions we'd
like to finish with a video made by the
sister of a patient I will introduce the
video before we make it but there will
be nothing else after that that video is
is is the is the last piece in some ways
and you when you see who you'll see and
understand why I will introduce the
video before that and then we'll end
evening so that's going to be the format
so Ezra why don't we start off with you
reading a little bit about from the book
give an introduction and also welcome to
whoever you want to welcome I may be the
first maybe one thought that comes to
mind is that there's not one book in
this book there are many books there is
a book that's a cry from the heart there
is a
that is that is a written by someone
who's been personally affected wounded
by cancer there is a book about policy
there's a book about politics there is a
book about polemics there's a book it's
an argument and also it's a it's a
biography it's an autobiography so there
are stories of individuals but then
those stories of individuals become
mechanisms of or ways to think about
where we are in this journey and what
the landscape looks like so it is not
one book but many books like all great
books are so I will eventually I will
try to break apart all these different
strands these many books that are
condensed in in one book but let me
let's begin with with you and your and
your chosen passages thank you and thank
you to pioneer works thank you to
Meredith and Jenna and Dustin and most
of all thank you to Sid who is wonderful
colleague and I can't imagine a better
interlocutor for myself then Siddharth
because we share a lab we do so many
things together and the hope this
evening is that we'll have a
conversation and Sid will contribute
equally today is an interesting day to
have this conversation especially
because I read this article that came
out by the director of the National
Institute of Health in Time magazine dr.
Francis Collins those of you who don't
know dr. Collins is the one who led the
group which from the side of the
government to sequence the first human
genome I can't think of a bigger project
than that
and he was the leader from the
government side craig venter did the
private privately funded genome
sequencing and in this special issue of
Time magazine which is devoted to
innovation in health dr. Francis Collins
has described his vision for the future
of the state of health and what we are
planning to do and one of the things he
points out in the very first paragraph
is that something that the nation can be
proud of is the fact that there is a
drop in mortality from heart disease by
70% but in the same sentence he also
says and also mortality from cancer is
dropping by 1% a year and that's a very
staggering statistic 70% versus 1% so I
thought I'll read a relevant passage
about that which is actually the
epilogue of the book so I'll read just a
couple of Perak pages from him
my older sister amra my brother Tasneem
and I took my mother shopping in Buffalo
one sunny summer afternoon when she was
visiting from Karachi the sneem a
cardiac surgeon and Buffalo General
Hospital had already performed hundreds
of coronary bypass surgeries and his
group was leading the charge in heart
transplant in western New York it was
impossible to walk 50 feet in the mall
without being stopped by one of his
cured patients pumping his hand
enthusiastically beaming at our mother
abortion gratitude because her son had
hit royally saved their lives of course
at home this name was less eulogized
we siblings refusing to let him develop
the god complex of heart surgeons we
teased him mercilessly at family
gatherings my sister Sora would
innocently ask opps what do you call to
cardiac surgeons looking at an EKG I
would reply deadpan a double-blind study
thankfully no one likes a joke better
than the sneem who would gleefully
address the pediatrician my sister Thea
the radiologist my sister Sola and
oncologists me statistically speaking
ladies nine out of ten injections you
give are in vain he also loved calling
us by an acronym which we reserved for
our ex-boyfriends hello sisters what is
the NATO group up to this evening
NATO being our code word for no action
talk only or he would ask us sweetly if
we had heard of the mechanic working on
the heart surgeons motorbike who said so
dog look at this engine I open it its
heart I take the valves out I repair the
damage and put them back in and when I
finish it works just like new so how
come I make 40 thousand a year and you
get 40 thousand a month
the surgeon replied smugly try doing it
with the engine running as we were
returning home my mother asked the
question I had been dreading well you've
been in Buffalo for almost 10 years I've
never met any of your patients
why are heart patients doing so much
better she had put her finger on the
heart of the matter the sneem and I
often had the same conversation our
conclusion heart doctors recognized that
the only effective treatment was
prevention and early intervention the
equivalent of cancer in heart disease
Bearheart so severely damaged that the
only possible treatment would be a
transplant advanced cancer is like this
end-stage heart disease where only
extreme heroic measures have the
potential for saving lives so why don't
you find ways to diagnose cancer early
also my mother asked she was pleased to
hear that devoting my life to
understanding and treating MDS the pre
leukemic condition was my attempt to do
precisely that
catch the leukemia early well I'm glad
you're living in America then she said
you will have an easier time convincing
your colleagues to alter their attitudes
in Pakistan the system would be
impossible to change in one lifetime
I can read the second passage so the
point I'm making is exactly the point
that is raised by dr. Francis Collins in
Time magazine today that heart disease
mortality has dropped by 70% because
they catch it early and fix the
coronaries so well now you understand
the title of this book
but as Sid said this book is also a kind
of personal story although it has taken
me 18 years since my late husband's
death to actually be able to even
verbalize some of it so I'll just read
the prologue so I read you the part of
the epilogue and I now go to the
prologue and then we can have a
conversation you can
or you could hear the middle because my
daughter Shahrazad has actually recorded
the audiobook and even no bias I think
she did a good job
so the prologue is is it's just pre fun
read it in the early spring of 1998 my
husband Harvey priceless was diagnosed
with cancer just to give you an idea
Harvey was head of the Cancer Center at
the University the following year we
plan to take our five year old daughter
Shahrazad and my brother job AIDS two
children visiting from Pakistan Musa and
the tool 8 and 12 to San Francisco for a
highly anticipated vacation we had
already postponed the trip twice before
it could be but it could be delayed no
longer the children were eager and given
Harvey's disfiguring facial edema and
then lodging node some form of
aggressive treatment sure to require us
to stay put in the city for months was
now imminent before any of that happened
he felt strongly that the family needed
to get out of the sweltering heat of
Chicago for a vacation even if just for
a week our flight to San Francisco was
on a bright clear summer morning having
arrived at the gate a good 90 minutes
before our departure we split up how we
sat down in the boarding area while I
chased the children around O'Hare we got
something to eat at the food court and
then returned to the gate I was shocked
by what I saw Harvey sat looking dazed
as streams of sweat poured from his body
making little puddles under his elbows
on the armed rests of the chair and
under his knees on the floor he was beat
read tributaries of glistening
perspiration filled the lines in his
handsome face making it appear
startlingly young he looked at me with
hushed anxiety I sent the tool running
for the nearest cafe to get me a handful
of napkins
dabbed Harvey's face and arms wiping the
chair on the floor there was no respite
the sweat came in torrential waves his
t-shirt and shorts were entirely soaked
and dripping the children stood around
trying not to look their faces ashen it
was a good 15 minutes before the deluge
subsided I walked to the gift shop and
purchased a fresh pair of pants and
shirt without saying a word little
eight-year-old Moussa stepped forward
quietly took the passage package from me
and gently escorted a bewildered Harvey
to the restroom being oncologists both
Harvey and I understood precisely what
the sweating meant known as a bee
symptom it's a well-recognized
manifestation of many cancers specially
lymphomas and it's not a good sign bee
symptoms are associated with a more
advanced more aggressive disease with a
poorer prognosis I suggested we cancel
the trip and return home but Harvey not
willing to disappoint the children yet
again insisted on going ahead the first
24 hours in San Francisco were filled
with apprehension as we drove the
children around the crooked street and
the harbor not knowing what to expect
fearing the worst nothing much happened
how he began to relax then in the middle
of the third night I woke up with a
start water dripped steadily on my face
Harvey's arm was arched over my head and
running like a faucet
this time he not only had to change his
clothing we had to call housekeeping to
replace the soaking wet sheets by the
time he returned to O'Hare a week later
how he had developed another bizarre
syndrome associated with many cancers
his left wrist suddenly blew up to twice
it's normal size despite the extra
strength tylenol I gave him he was
writhing in agony as
we climbed into the car to go home it
took 24 hours of cold packs and
heavy-duty analgesics to control the
excruciating pain the next few days were
some of the most tormented he
experienced regular episodes of
drenching sweats once or sometimes twice
during the night requiring fresh Betsy
bed sheets and clothing changes as
swelling subsided in one joint it popped
up elsewhere without warning fresh
lesions began with a tingling burning
sensation becoming bright red and
sizzling hot within hours nomadic
lymphoma cells meandered autonomously
rudderless edema regressed from the face
only to reappear in the joints lymph
nodes in the neck and armpits swelled
one day and receded the next followed by
a sudden enlargement of the spleen
itinerant cells segregated dispersed
recollected vanished regrouped they
wandered the body with a studied
carelessness entering and leaving organs
at will disgruntled edgy exploring
possible niches in various organs
rejecting some settling in others
horrified helpless we watched the drama
unfold Harvey from the inside I from the
outside the lymphoma marched on its
aimless monomaniacal journey into a
resolution with a motive less malignity
cancer is water had been treating for
two decades yet until I shared a bed
with a cancer patient I had no idea how
unbearably painful a disease it could be
it was the summer of our discontent
cancer and its discontents
[Applause]
I thought I would begin my questions by
reminding people of I'm incredible
passage from Louis Thomas's book when he
was an intern in the 1940s
Thomas describes how patients with heart
disease this is very relevant to what
you just said Thomas describes how
patients with heart disease were treated
in the 1950s so basically if you had
coronary disease or a heart attack in
the 40s and 50s the options were that
you would be brought to the hospital and
be put underneath an oxygen tent to to
give you oxygen and then really among
the only things that one could do was to
give you morphine to ease the pain and
then and usually an intern had to draw a
draw out a couple of pints of blood
every few hours and this was thought to
relieve the the pressure on the heart
and thereby ease the symptoms so not
long ago not 50 you know 40 50 years ago
60 years ago there was a moment if you
sat down in this audience you could say
that I would say what's your vision for
for the future of coronary disease
that's a huge killer and you'd say well
this is the future the future is that
you know we'll make better oxygen tents
will make larger syringes to draw out
blood we will have more powerful
versions of morphine and that would be
the vision and of course that would be
laughable today right what we have
instead is biomarkers for early
detection of heart disease many of you
know about them
cholesterol being one of them family
histories that are being used to find
patients who are at higher risk physical
signs and symptoms to identify patients
who are at risk before they actually
develop the risk hypertension me one of
them says the behavioral modification
smoking cessation being the probably the
most important of those and then
prophylactic met medicines aspirin and
medicines to reduce cholesterol and
finally after all of this surgical
intervention and other interventions do
so hopefully in twenty years or thirty
years from now we will also be laughing
grimly about the idea of using cell
killing poisons which is most of
chemotherapy to treat cancer in the same
way that we'd be laughing at or smiling
again grimly at the intern who had to
for every two hours withdraw two pints
of blood from a patient with with
coronary disease the one of the most
important passages that comes out of
this Louis Thomas observation is that is
the passage that he quotes from from
from Osler from William Osler the great
physician physician scientist who
basically advised his students to first
understand the disease and to understand
the disease and do nothing this idea was
called therapeutic nihilism it was not
first you know harm was first do nothing
because you don't know anything first
watch
first understand because doing things
actually can give you the false
confidence that you're you're actually
doing something
but observing making observations
recording understanding actually defeats
that that arrogance and reverses to some
extent our capacity to understand the
disease use you now approach the disease
with humility rather than then then
passion so this idea of therapeutic
nihilism was very became a very
important capstone in medicine so I'm
sorry for the long prologue to this
question but walk us 20 years from now
Azra and imagine for us a world in which
is different and imagine the journey of
off maybe a pre cancer patient or a
patient without overt cancer and tell us
how we will be smiling grimly 20 years
from now well I think the points you
have made are very relevant because it
just brought to my mind a quotation from
Einstein who said that if I was given
one hour to solve a problem I would
spend fifty five minutes trying to
define the problem and five minutes for
the solution one of the main reasons why
I wrote this book is because I was
inspired by the patient young Andrew
twenty two-year-old my daughter's best
friend who gets diagnosed with a brain
tumor but the idea is to bring the
patient back front and center into every
conversation to make a distinction
between disease and illness disease is
what doctors diagnose and treat but
illness is what patients experience and
so why not look at every single thing
through the prism of human anguish
because we have moved too far away we're
so obsessed with trying to find a cure
that we have forgotten about healing
I think 20 years from now one of the
most important things we will think
about is that it's not that we didn't
just have a solution of cancer but we
were not willing to even define the
problem and face it clearly well the
problem is that for any patient with
advanced cancer today if it is not
detected early and is not treatable by
the SLAs poison burn approach then the
outlook and response to treatment is no
better than it was 50 years ago suddenly
we are curing 68% of the patients who
are diagnosed today curing 68% that's a
wonderful number but curing with what
these really stone age kinds of
treatments chemotherapy this these were
things used in the world war to kill
your enemy I mean in this day and age of
sophisticated technology where we are
proudly claiming to be cutting and
pasting DNA why are we using these
Paleolithic measures but still 68%
patients lived through it all and are
cured what about the 32% for whom we are
offering nothing this is one of the
problems then not only are they
physically suffering a study just came
out that looked at nine and a half
million cancer patients diagnosed in
America over a twenty 12 year period
recently and 42% patients diagnosed with
cancer 42% lose every penny of their
life savings by two plus years and
become completely financially ruined
without being cured this I mean what
could be a bigger problem than
first of all we seem to be giving an
impression to the public that a lot has
changed yes a lot of patients are being
killed and there is a drop in to cancer
mortality and death rate by 26% in the
last 50 years but most of it is because
of anti-smoking campaigns or early
detection of cancer because of screening
measures what screening measures very
gross ones mammography colonoscopy
putting a tube into the gut and looking
I mean really in this day and age that's
the best we can do
PSA and pap smear these are the four
methods and people keep asking me oh
those methods haven't been perfect you
know they can over diagnose lead to over
I mean for God's sake we need to use the
current technology to detect cancer
early and prevent it so the problem that
I want to define very clearly is that we
have to question what we are doing today
and we need to stop painting some
glowing picture as if the magic cure is
right around the corner so so go back a
little bit to the title of the book and
talk about that the first cell one of
the I think the one of the wisest minds
in cancer widely acknowledged as one of
the wisest minds in cancer is of course
Bert vogelstein the problem with Bert is
that he is very close friend but he
won't sit on airplanes he has a
pathological fear of airplanes and so
you can't meet him except to go to him
go to his office once when he winds
extremely large or very very substantial
awards including the Lasker and other
prizes he's won many he will travel but
only under those circumstances but Bert
Bert vogelstein is very important figure
in cancer because
as many discoveries too many to name but
of course one very important discovery
that Bert made early on in his life was
to show that cancer doesn't just
suddenly appear one day out of the head
of Zeus a cell doesn't wake up in the
morning and say I'm going to become a
cancer cell it undergoes a series of
mutational events it might undergo as as
many as 10 15 20 30 changes their breast
cancers their breast cancers where their
cells have acquired a hundred mutational
events and there's certainly other
cancers that cells have acquired
hundreds of mutation events and so
rather than as I said waking up one
morning and becoming a cancer cells
cells slouched towards cancer and Bert
discovered this by defining these events
he discovered that he defined the
mutational events and what's fascinating
about from there is that having done so
he began to focus very much on
prevention on finding the cell before it
had acquired all its final mutations so
tell us about about about this idea of
the first cell and tell us about why one
might be able to find it tell us about
how you imagine finding finding the
first cell and why it's important yeah
in fact I'm a big of course everybody is
a big admirer and of Bert vogelstein and
he's one of the most respectable figures
and I'm so glad that he has gotten all
gone through the whole sequence of
events that you described and is
dedicating his life to now early
detection also and they have this cancer
seek as you know coming out and very
exciting work coming from him for me the
questions really began back in 1984 I
came to this country as a young medical
graduate in 1977 I got involved
immediately starting to
study acute myeloid leukemia first and
then did my residency training and then
continued my treatment of patients as
well as studying the disease in the lab
and to this day I see 30 to 40 patients
every week and I had I supervised a very
active research lab and of course I'm a
cancer widow as you just heard and for
me it became very clear within six or
seven years of starting to treat
leukemia that this is far too
complicated aggressive and malignant a
disease for us to control in my lifetime
at least so I pinned up my hopes on
trying to prevent it from happening and
indeed I was seeing many many patients
who would give me a history that before
they developed acute leukemia and came
to see me their counts had been dropping
or they had developed a knee Mia a
couple of years before and that piqued
my interest immediately about what was
that stage pre leukemic stage and back
in 1984 because of an experience with a
patient Jacy who forms chapter 5 of this
book I became obsessed with studying the
disease earlier than leukemia with the
hope that we could prevent it from from
happening and the idea was literally
this first cell idea back in 1984 so
Bert vogelstein has defined these stages
very carefully for colorectal cancers
but these neat little stages don't
always occur in every kind of cancer for
example breast cancer doesn't progress
like that prostate cancer doesn't go
through all these neat stages and in
fact pre leukemia which is known as Malu
dysplastic syndromes these are also very
heterogeneous kind of diseases in which
some patients will develop yukimi out of
the blue within a few months and others
I have been treating for 25 years and
still are doing fine and leading good
qualities of life so it's not that easy
to predict in other words in order to
define the natural history of a disease
we can't use statistics and apply them
to individuals we basically have to look
at every individual as a person and try
to see how their disease is going to
behave not how 60% of patients behaved
in another large study so I realized
several things earlier on one it's
better to prevent then to allow the
disease to reach and this end-stage
monstrosity which is um not controllable
easily and to in order to do that we
should really try to study what are the
footprints of this early evolution and
so I started saving samples on my
patients from blood and bone marrow back
in 1984 for this express reason to try
and define and identify how the first
leukemia cell appears in a pre leukemia
patient and can we find it and can we
kill it one of the best things even if
we find the first cell how do you kill
one cell in the body and you will be
surprised to know that so many
sophisticated technologies have already
been developed to identify one cell why
because once we treat a cancer patient
with all kinds of aggressive therapies
we are still concerned that they may be
something left over so we have developed
all this fancy technology to detect the
residual cancer cells the last minimal
disease that's left behind my point is
why not just reverse it instead of
minimal residual disease go for minimal
initial disease
well that poses a problem because to
look for minimal residual disease or the
last cancer cell we know which
individuals to look in in patients who
have been treated for cancer we can then
in their blood or marrow or saliva or
tears or urine anything for the presence
of cancer in any form but how do you
look for the first cell who should you
look at even should you be looking at
everybody
is anyone immune from cancer no but the
idea is that by studying and identifying
the earliest footprints of say leukemia
the earliest footprints of prostate
cancer earliest footprints of breast
cancer once we have those markers we can
even have a chip that has a barcode of
all these markers that you can drop one
drop of blood and the chip detects which
one in once a month why do we have to do
screening by using age old technologies
once a year no I'm saying we should be
monitoring the human body continuously
for the appearance of disease caused
perturbations earlier on and I think the
concept of the first cell is not new
everyone wants to do it everyone wants
to detect it but I don't think that
enough resources have been devoted
towards this because we are dealing with
active patients all the time
and most of the resources are going to
try and treat the last cancer cell which
is not I'm not against it at all I treat
patients all the time myself so of
course that's important but I do think
that we have two sets of problems one
for the present cancer patients and one
for the future I don't think anyone in
this room is more than one degree of
separation from cancer right now either
you have canceled yourself or you know
someone or you love someone who has had
cancer this is how prevalent it is so
it's a very real question for all of us
what to do with patients who have cancer
now I think number one is
the rule in medicine is first do no harm
and I'm asking that the best of
therapies we are developing right now
help only a fraction of patients 20%
patients are helped with a drug and we
are proclaiming it from the rooftops as
a game-changer 20% patients improved
survival by 5 months at the cost of
hundreds of thousands of dollars a year
we celebrate the 20% Ezra that five
months meant a lot to my patient of
course it did but what about the 80% who
suffered physical toxicities as well as
financial ruin why are we not thinking
about them why are we ignoring that
first rule of medicine first to no harm
it's somehow the most visible has become
invisible right now we're just doing
things because other people have decided
for us this is the algorithm you need to
follow if somebody is diagnosed with
pancreatic cancer this is first-line
therapy you're going to give this a
second-line therapy third line and then
send them to hospice and no one is
questioning it if I if I don't do it
I'll be in jail because this is what's
suggested by the oncologist so do you
think that there will be some cancer
some cancer is a very heterogeneous
disease obviously some cancers as it
turns out finding not the first cell but
certainly finding an early cell has made
a huge difference so two examples stand
out in this one of them is an
international is really a is an
international success and that is the
detection of cervical cancer through pap
smear in really invented 20 miles from
here
by George Papanicolaou actually if
you've never done it you can actually go
in Papanikolaou Hosparus cope and his
slides are still you can see them all
yeah up at Cornell I went in a tiny room
it's actually virtually impossible to
find hidden away in the wild corner
hospital is Peppa nikolaos original lab
where he and and and all his slides are
there I mean you can actually look at
the first perhaps minute slides anyway
that's one example and the second of
course example is colon cancer where you
can find early lesions through
colonoscopy gross as it might be I don't
mean physically grossest but as not
sophisticated way but certainly you can
find them and in both cases we've seen
mortality drop
we've seen public figures that in fact
is a drop in mortality is it possible
that some cancers will be much more
amenable to finding the first cell while
other cancers will be very very hard to
find first of all much like as I said
the pap smear and II and the and and
colonoscopy revolutionized those two
fields or do you think that that we will
eventually find first fingerprints first
footprints of most cancers if not all
cancers is there is there something
about the cancer that that's relevant
here
well treating cancer is one diseases
like treating Africa is one country it
is so different in within the same
individual in two places cancer is
completely different cancer of the colon
when it metastasizes to the liver the
liver metastasis is totally different
soil the seed changes to adapt itself to
the soil very different cancer so of
course what you have said is exactly
right that some cancers will be easily
followed up and for the detection
the first set others will will really
challenge our our wits to the end and
will be harder to detect but hey I mean
if we can start I mean you just the
statistics are so mind-boggling right
now I want to give everybody some pause
to think about this in the last 50 years
the only things we have done some
exceptions rare exceptions and uncommon
cancers dr. Conte rice sitting in the
room the original right classification
what an honor it is to have him here I
mean he has changed he has seen a sea
change in the disease he is treating
chronic lymphocytic because I mean this
is as you point out this is not just a
doom and gloom book well of course so so
there are you know I'm reminded I was I
was chairing a symposium on ovarian
cancer yesterday because we were met we
were making real ovarian organoids
from patients we're taking actual
cancers growing them in dishes which we
couldn't do before one of the great
peculiar ironies of cancer is that while
it grows with with such malignant feel T
in the body if you take it out of the
body they're actually hard to grow we
now know why they actually very specific
reasons why they depend very much on the
microenvironment they depend where they
they eat things but just to give a sense
of of of some of the changes the disease
chronic lymphocytic leukemia actually
not an uncommon cancer has seen a
complete sea change myeloma if you
walked into if you had multiple myeloma
there's a lovely study from the Mayo
Clinic it's very hard to it's very very
difficult as you know to understand
progress in a disease because you can be
fooled by survival statistics
I've written extensively about the
survival statistics are very very very
poor mechanisms to understand progress
on disease because they are very biased
because if you detect things early you
move the survival statistic but you
actually haven't changed the disease in
other words it's it's it's a bias it's a
lead bias it's a very common bias so
people say gosh you know five years
survival from breast cancer has
increased by fifty percent but that's
all that's mainly not only but mainly
because we're detecting earlier cancers
and by detecting earlier cancers if you
falsely figure out that 5-year survival
is increased but in some diseases when
you can do real studies if you were a
patient with myeloma and walked into a
myeloma clinic in 1993 your chances of
being alive at six to eight months was I
don't know what number would be twenty
percent say that num number has doubled
if not tripled and now if you walk in
the same patient walks in today that
number has has tripled so tell us about
how you imagine if you were given the
the reins of the of the National Cancer
Institute what three things would you do
to make substantial differences in the
lives of of patients with cancer how
would you change the the National Cancer
addenda I mean I think the most
important thing is as I said is to bring
the patient back front and center we
need to study the patient we need to to
really determine the disease in vivo in
humans people keep telling me oh you
can't do tests in humans then don't do
them find something else to do in humans
that you can detect you can detect
biomarkers you can develop means to find
cell-free DNA that's
shed so the three things I would do
number one bring the patient back front
and center to study human tissue get
away at least for drug development and
treatment animal models are very good as
biologic tools but they are no good as
means of developing drugs you can't
treat a rabbit or a mouse with a drug
and say the same thing will happen in
humans it won't but people seem to think
I'm against all animal models no I'm not
but I am against drug development in
animals so study humans do the clinical
trials properly and at least half the
resources devoted towards research
should go towards prevention screening
through the latest technology let me
describe a couple of things to you for
example when a cancer begins the cells
divide faster than normal cells so they
need to attract nutrition for fast
proliferation which means they start
making blood vessels which means the
area becomes hot tomorrow's technology
will be that you go to sleep in bed
sheets that are scanning you overnight
for the appearance of a hot spot you sit
on a fit loo in the morning that takes
part of your urine and looks for bio
markers on a daily basis you breathe
into a device that measures molecules
that are being discharged from lung
cancers you literally as women wear a
smart bra for two hours a week and the
bra is equipped with 200 sensors that
are detecting changes in temperature and
blood flow two hours a week instead of
once a year mammogram think of the
difference I'm talking about these are
the technologies we need to develop why
aren't we looking for the footprints of
cancer in the forms of protein that are
proteins that
shed into the saliva or the blood these
are called liquid biopsies so patient
study the patient spend at least half
the money in prevention but we must
continue also for the sake of our
current patients to keep investing at
least half the money in developing
treatments as well but my contention is
that the same treatment which is causing
immense toxicity and very little benefit
today the failure rate of drugs brought
to the bedside of a cancer patient is
95% 95% drug trials fail in America
right now in cancer the 5% that succeed
extend the survival by an average of 2.5
months for a fraction of the patients
what kind of obscenity is this and it
costs a hundred thousand dollars a year
for that treatment so imagine that you
have give you an example CIN you brought
out multiple myeloma just now on
September 5th I read an article in stat
news by Gail McIntosh she reported that
3 well-controlled
large trials were done in multiple
myeloma using the latest immune therapy
called checkpoint inhibitors all three
trials were negative
so dr. Richard Pasteur this brilliant
director of the Center for Excellence in
oncology at the FDA he commented on this
study and first of all he asked the
question why did you need three large
trials to show a negative result and
secondly do you know these checkpoint
inhibitors pd-1 and PDL one inhibitors
in multiple myeloma I'm talking about
secondly do you know how many trials are
going on in the country right now with
pd-1 PDL one inhibitors not 100 not 500
not a thousand not fifteen two thousand
two hundred trials this meet to
mentality if a target is identified and
a drug gets fda-approved everybody and
their grandmother wants to make another
drug for the same target think of the
creativity it is squashing because now
you're not looking for new targets so
these changes have to be instituted I
think that our agencies are not
performing their responsibilities
properly by not demanding at least that
anyone who's who wants to do a clinical
trial should have in place some measures
to protect the patients who are not
going to respond at least in the first
trial we treat everybody the same but in
the follow-up trial we should be able to
distinguish between those who responded
and those who didn't respond and compare
their samples at every level using every
technology available to us we don't why
not so these are the changes that have
to be instituted we have to change the
way we are doing things but mostly what
I am saying is at least half the budget
should go towards prevention and early
detection by and developing the latest
technology to do it the other half to
continue developing treatments well
we're up to the hours so I think add one
more thing before we finish though two
more things one is this immune therapy
with car t-cells is very popular
everyone's heard about it so many
practically every patient who comes to
see me in clinics it will ask me why
aren't you giving me cardi therapy
because this is spin and rightfully so
it is a game changer for some people but
do you know the premise of this
treatment what it is the premise is that
we have failed as scientists to find
something that distinguishes a normal
cell from a malignant cell perfectly we
can't find anything right now so Carty
is you just take out the patient's own
t-cells and tell it to kill the entire
organ Norma
and abnormal cells together so let's say
that if there is a tumor in the liver we
can't tell which cell has is the
cancerous liver cell and which cell is
the normal liver cell so we kill the
whole liver this is what we are doing
with corty the only thing it's working
on is b-cells we destroy every b-cell in
the patient's body which means normal
and abnormal and then we can replace the
b-cell function with continuous
infusions monthly infusions of
immunoglobulins you can't do that to the
liver you can't destroy the liver and
then give back monthly liver doses so
that's why corty can't be but it is so
drastic a measure and by killing every B
cell in the body imagine the kind of
cytokine storms and the body's reaction
is such that patients lives are at stake
they are threatened my question is the
same treatment if we can with the help
of biomarkers give the address to the
t-cells then that will be directed much
better and tree and and killing a few
million cells compared to hundreds of
billions the toxicity will be much much
lower so with this in mind this is why
in 1984 I started to collect the samples
that earlier detection will make the
same treatments which are causing so
much problem now by directing it
properly so the last thing I wanted to
say was that this tissue repository is
very important why because we have
followed patients longitudinally as they
progress in the natural history of their
disease from pre leukemia to until their
death whether they die of MDS or they
die of acute leukemia and the idea is to
catch the appearance of the first
leukemia cell and we are working with
dr. Patricia Petra lady who is here
tonight in the audience a fantastic
French scientist who has developed a
machine that can detect one abnormal
cell in
of blood this rare cells detection is an
incredible advance the idea is every
patient who has pre leukemia we are
trying to study their blood samples to
see the appearance of the first cell in
the blood without waiting for the bone
marrow to be completely invaded by
billions and billions of cells in and
then detecting it I think it's very
important for me to really emphasize the
point that not only is it important to
study human tissue why aren't we saving
human tissue for doing why haven't
institutions invested in bio banking
properly I mean I am I have been saving
these cells for the last 30 plus years
and 60,000 samples from thousands of
patients not a single cell is
contributed by another physician and the
idea is that we now have the tissue to
study we have all the techniques
developed we need to just go and apply
these measures but where is the will
where are the resources so the idea is
if we set a new goal then the goal is no
longer trying to develop drugs that have
a 95 percent failure rate but the goal
is to try and develop new technology to
detect the first cell and if we
financially incentivize this goal then
everybody will want to do that why
aren't we doing this and this is the
main reason for me to really be forced
to I mean I've been saying these things
for 30 years
giving Grand Rounds giving dinner
lectures giving breakfast talks giving
tumor boards fearing in on Tehran radio
on television in podcasts everybody
listens to me they agree with me then
they go home and do the same thing so
the book is just one more weapon in my
assault on the
that at least if you learn about the
granularity of human agony and anguish
that we are putting patients and their
families through maybe you will be
shaken into doing something different so
if you beware of Asura you should really
be wary of a weaponized Asura we'll just
end with this thank you so much
[Applause]